Python One Time Pad Software 
William M. Marcy, PhD, PE 
Las Cruces, NM 
Updated 10-20-2023. 
 
These software programs written in Python implement one time pad (OTP) encipher and decipher of computer files. The software performs byte by byte XORs between
a source file and a random number file to OTP encipher and decipher any arbitrary file. As a practical matter any file can be used as a one time pad to encipher
any other file. The closer the OTP file is to being a truly random collection of bytes, the more secure the enciphered file will be. As you will learn below the
XOR operation is completely reversible. You can use a JPG photo file as your OTP to encipher any other file. You can use a DOCX file to encipher another DOCX file,
etc. These Python applications allow you to compute the entropy of any file of 8 bit bytes. A perfectly random file will have an entropy of exactly 8.0000 bits. 
It is not unusual for a large JPG photo file to have an entropy of 7.998+ bits. Photo files are very usable as OTP files. Large video files are very usable as OTP files. 

1. OTP-Encipher-Decipher.py 
This cryptographic utility XORs bytes sequentially from any arbitrary file with bytes from a random number one time pad (OTP) file using a cipher key. The OTP is
treated as a circular random number list. The cipher key is the starting point in the OTP where the XOR operation begins. The cipher key can be any number between
0 and the length of the OTP -1 since in computer science we start counting bytes at 0. If the OTP consists of 1 Giga byte of random 8 bit numbers, then the cipher
key can be any number between 0 and 999,999,999. The cipher key makes deciphering files extremely difficult even if the OTP file used to perform the cipher is
compromised. When the program s resulting XOR bytes are created they are saved in a user chosen file and directory. This is the enciphered file which can be sent
to another person by any means, e.g., e-mail attachment, DropBox, iCloud, OneDrive, SDC card, etc. 
 
2. OTP-Random-File-Generator.py 
The random number generator written in Python can produce very large random number files consisting of bytes with binary values between decimal
0 - 255 (00000000b   11111111b). These files use a cryptographic quality random number generator called  os.urandom.   The seed for the random number generator
is generated from a real time computer-based time source. Every random number file is unique since the seed number cannot be reproduced.  
 
3. OTP-Compute-Entropy.py 
This program, written in Python, calculates the probability of each number 0-255 occurring in a file.  This utility computes the entropy of a file of 8 bit bytes
using  sum (p*log2(p)) for all values in the file. P is the probability that a given value occurs. Entropy is measured in bits. An 8 bit byte can store positive
integers in the range 0-255. If all values in this range are equally likely to occur, then the entropy will be exactly 8.0000.  The average value will be
exactly 127.5. The closer the entropy value is to 8.0 the closer the values are to being equally likely. Equally likely is as random as it gets.
This is a very interesting utility since it can be applied to any computer file of 8-bit bytes. Large OTP files of cryptographic quality random numbers frequently
have entropies in the range 7.99999+. These are very random numbers. It is informative to explore other files which often exhibit a surprisingly high degree of
entropy (randomness). A 10 mb JPG photo file will often have an entropy in the range of 7.997+. A MP4 video file will frequent have entropy in the range 7.99997+.
This means is that innocuous files can be pressed into service as an OTP. Using the OTP-Random-File generator a random file of 999,999,999 bytes was created.
The entropy utility computed the median value as 127.49911655 and the entropy in bits:  7.999999807984. 
 
4. The OTP-Binary-Segment- Utility 
This utility allows you to segment a large existing random number file to produce a new OTP. Many large files can be segmented for use as an OTP.
A downloaded video file is a good source. Videos are often gigabytes in size. Photos are typically many megabytes in size and can exhibit very high entropy.
he OTP-Compute-Entropy program will allow you to assess their potential for use as a source of random bytes. Entropy values in the range of 7.97+ are perfectly adequate.
A value of 8.0000 is perfect, but not achievable in practice. The entropy of large OTP files included in this ZIP file are in the 7.998+ range. The 999,999,999
generated by the random number program and included in the ZIP file  has the following entropy data: Median:  127.49911655,  Entropy in bits:  7.999999807984.
       
